.\" data_boar.5 - file formats and configuration for Data Boar (engine: python3-lgpd-crawler)
.\" View as: man 5 data_boar or man 5 lgpd_crawler (symlink for compatibility)
.TH DATA_BOAR 5 "March 2026" "Data Boar 1.6.1" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
data_boar config, lgpd_crawler config \- configuration and pattern file formats for Data Boar (LGPD audit application)
.
.SH WHY TWO MAN PAGES (SECTION 1 AND 5)
On Linux, BSD and most Unix-like systems, the
.B man
command uses numbered
.I sections
to group manual pages by topic.
Section
.B 1
describes
.I executable programs and shell commands
(e.g. how to run the program and its options).
Section
.B 5
describes
.I file formats and conventions
(e.g. configuration files and their syntax).
.
.P
This project provides two man pages in different sections; both the
.B data_boar
and
.B lgpd_crawler
names work (install with symlinks so both resolve):
.TP
.B "man data_boar"
or
.B "man lgpd_crawler"
(or
.BR "man 1 data_boar" ,
.BR "man 1 lgpd_crawler" )
Shows the
.I command
and its options (config path, \-\-web, \-\-port, \-\-tenant, \-\-technician, API usage, curl examples).
Use this when you want to know how to run the application.
.TP
.B "man 5 data_boar"
or
.B "man 5 lgpd_crawler"
Shows the
.I configuration and optional file formats
(main config topology, regex/ML/DL pattern files, examples).
Use this when you want to understand or edit config files and pattern definitions.
.
.P
If you type only
.B "man data_boar"
or
.B "man lgpd_crawler"
the system usually shows section 1 first (the command).
To open the config/file-format page explicitly, use
.BR "man 5 data_boar"
or
.BR "man 5 lgpd_crawler" .
.
.SH OVERVIEW
The application uses one main configuration file (YAML or JSON) and can optionally reference external files to
.I override
or
.I expand
regex patterns and to
.I train
the ML and DL classifiers.
This page describes the topology of those files and their formats, with examples compatible with the current application capabilities.
.
.SH TOPOLOGY
.IP \(bu 2
.B Main config file
(default
.IR config.yaml ):
defines targets (databases, filesystems, APIs, shares), file_scan, report, api, sqlite_path, scan,
.B rate_limit
and optional paths to the files below.
.IP \(bu 2
.B regex_overrides_file
(optional): path to a YAML/JSON file listing custom
.I regex
patterns; merged with built-in patterns and matched against (column name + sample text).
.IP \(bu 2
.B ml_patterns_file
(optional): path to a YAML/JSON file with
.I ML
training terms (text + label: sensitive / non_sensitive).
Used by the TF-IDF + RandomForest classifier when no inline terms are provided.
.IP \(bu 2
.B dl_patterns_file
(optional): path to a YAML/JSON file with
.I DL
training terms (same format as ML).
Used by the optional sentence-embedding classifier when the DL extra is installed.
.IP \(bu 2
.B sensitivity_detection
(optional): inline section in the main config with
.I ml_terms
and/or
.I dl_terms
lists; when non-empty they override loading from
.B ml_patterns_file
/
.BR dl_patterns_file .
.IP \(bu 2
.B learned_patterns
(optional): section in the main config that enables writing
.I learned
terms (classified as sensitive during a run) to an output file, which you can later merge into
.B ml_patterns_file
to improve future scans.
.
.P
All paths in the main config can be absolute or relative to the process working directory.
.
.SH SECURITY AND CREDENTIALS
Database and MongoDB connection strings are built with URL-encoded user and password, so credentials containing @, :, / or # are handled correctly; no extra escaping is required in the config file.
When
.I api.require_api_key
is true, the Configuration page (GET /config) is protected and returns 401 without a valid X-API-Key or Bearer token.
Technicians: restrict config file permissions and enable
.I api.require_api_key
when the API is exposed to untrusted networks; see
.I SECURITY.md
and
.I docs/security.md
for fixes, regression tests, and full recommendations.
.
.SH MAIN CONFIGURATION FILE
The main file (e.g.
.IR config.yaml )
is YAML or JSON.
Top-level keys:
.
.TP
.B targets
List of scan targets.
Each item has at least
.I name
and
.I type
(database, filesystem, api, sharepoint, webdav, smb, nfs, powerbi, dataverse, etc.), plus type-specific keys (driver, host, port, user, pass, database for DB; path, recursive for filesystem; etc.).
.TP
.B file_scan
.I extensions
(list, e.g. [.txt, .csv, .pdf]), 
.I recursive
(bool),
.I scan_sqlite_as_db
(bool),
.I sample_limit
(integer).
.TP
.B report
.I output_dir
(path);
optionally
.I recommendation_overrides
(list of norm_tag_pattern, base_legal, risk, recommendation, priority, relevant_for) to customise the Recommendations sheet per category.
.TP
.B api
.I port
(integer);
optionally
.I require_api_key
(bool),
.I api_key
(string) or
.I api_key_from_env
(env var name).
The web API also sends security headers (CSP, HSTS, Referrer-Policy, Permissions-Policy); see
.I SECURITY.md
and
.I docs/deploy/DEPLOY.md
for hardening and stricter CSP.
.TP
.B sqlite_path
Path to the SQLite database (e.g.
.IR audit_results.db ).
.TP
.B scan
.I max_workers
(integer, parallelism).
.TP
.B rate_limit
(optional) Global safeguards against accidental DoS or abuse:
.I enabled
(bool),
.I max_concurrent_scans
(integer, max running scans at the same time),
.I min_interval_seconds
(integer, minimum seconds between scan starts),
.I grace_for_running_status
(integer, optional extra tolerance when status still reports running).
When enabled, API endpoints that start scans may return HTTP 429 with a structured JSON body containing
.I error
and
.I reason
fields (the CLI only prints warnings).
.TP
.B detection
(optional) Minor data and aggregated identification:
.I minor_age_threshold
(default 18),
.I minor_cross_reference
(bool),
.I minor_full_scan
(bool),
.I aggregated_identification_enabled
(bool),
.I aggregated_min_categories
(integer),
.I quasi_identifier_mapping
(list).
.TP
.B ml_patterns_file
Path to ML terms file (used if
.B sensitivity_detection.ml_terms
is not set).
.TP
.B dl_patterns_file
Path to DL terms file (used if
.B sensitivity_detection.dl_terms
is not set).
.TP
.B regex_overrides_file
Path to custom regex patterns file.
.TP
.B sensitivity_detection
(optional) Inline
.I ml_terms
and/or
.I dl_terms
(list of { text, label }).
.TP
.B learned_patterns
(optional)
.I enabled
(bool),
.I output_file
(path),
.I min_sensitivity
(HIGH/MEDIUM),
.I min_confidence
(integer),
.I require_pattern
(bool),
.I append
(bool),
.I exclude_if_in_ml_patterns
(bool).
.
.P
Example main config (excerpt):
.RS
.nf
\fBtargets:\fR
  \- name: "Produção_Postgres"
    type: database
    driver: postgresql+psycopg2
    host: 10.0.0.50
    port: 5432
    user: audit_user
    pass: secure_password
    database: customers_db
  \- name: "Documentos_LGPD"
    type: filesystem
    path: /home/user/Documents/LGPD
    recursive: true

\fBfile_scan:\fR
  extensions: [.txt, .csv, .pdf, .docx, .xlsx]
  recursive: true
  scan_sqlite_as_db: true
  sample_limit: 5

\fBreport:\fR
  output_dir: .
  recommendation_overrides:
    \- norm_tag_pattern: "health"
      base_legal: "LGPD Art. 5 II, 11; GDPR Art. 9"
      risk: "Health or medical condition data."
      recommendation: "Ensure legal basis and consent."
      priority: "CRÍTICA"
      relevant_for: "DPO, Compliance"

\fBapi:\fR
  port: 8088

\fBsqlite_path:\fR audit_results.db
\fBscan:\fR
  max_workers: 1

\fBml_patterns_file:\fR config/ml_patterns.yaml
\fBregex_overrides_file:\fR config/regex_overrides.yaml
.fi
.RE
.
.SH REGEX OVERRIDES FILE
Used to add or override regex patterns for value-based detection.
Set
.B regex_overrides_file
in the main config to the path of a YAML or JSON file.
.
.P
Format: a list of objects, each with:
.TP
.B name
(required) Short identifier (e.g. RG_BR, PLATE_BR). Shown in reports as
.IR pattern_detected .
.TP
.B pattern
(required) Regular expression (Python
.B re
syntax). Matched against (column name + sample text). Use word boundaries (e.g. \e\eb) to reduce false positives.
.TP
.B norm_tag
(optional) Label for compliance/reporting (e.g. "LGPD Art. 5", "Custom"). Default "Custom".
.
.P
You can use a root-level list or a key
.B patterns
or
.B regex
containing the list.
.
.P
Example (YAML):
.RS
.nf
\- name: "RG_BR"
  pattern: "\e\eb\e\ed{1,2}\e\.?\e\ed{3}\e\.?\e\ed{3}-?[0-9Xx]\e\eb"
  norm_tag: "LGPD Art. 5"

\- name: "PLATE_BR_OLD"
  pattern: "\e\eb[A-Z]{3}-?\e\ed{4}\e\eb"
  norm_tag: "Personal data context"

\- name: "CEP_BR"
  pattern: "\e\eb\e\ed{5}-?\e\ed{3}\e\eb"
  norm_tag: "LGPD Art. 5"
.fi
.RE
.
.P
Built-in patterns (no need to redefine unless overriding): LGPD_CPF, LGPD_CNPJ, EMAIL, CREDIT_CARD, PHONE_BR, CCPA_SSN, DATE_DMY.
.
.SH ML AND DL PATTERNS FILES
Both
.B ml_patterns_file
and
.B dl_patterns_file
use the same format.
They list training terms for the ML classifier (TF-IDF + RandomForest) and, when installed, the DL classifier (sentence embeddings).
.
.P
Format: a list of objects, each with:
.TP
.B text
(required) A phrase or token (e.g. "cpf", "religious affiliation", "health condition").
.TP
.B label
(required) Either
.B sensitive
(or
.BR 1 )
or
.B non_sensitive
(or
.BR 0 ).
.
.P
The file can be a root-level list or an object with key
.B patterns
or
.B terms
containing the list.
When
.B sensitivity_detection.ml_terms
or
.B sensitivity_detection.dl_terms
is set in the main config (non-empty), that list is used instead of loading from the corresponding file.
.
.P
Example (YAML) for ML/DL terms:
.RS
.nf
\- text: "cpf"
  label: sensitive
\- text: "email"
  label: sensitive
\- text: "data de nascimento"
  label: sensitive
\- text: "religious affiliation"
  label: sensitive
\- text: "political affiliation"
  label: sensitive
\- text: "item_count"
  label: non_sensitive
\- text: "config_file"
  label: non_sensitive
.fi
.RE
.
.P
Inline example in main config:
.RS
.nf
\fBsensitivity_detection:\fR
  ml_terms:
    \- { text: "cid", label: sensitive }
    \- { text: "religion", label: sensitive }
    \- { text: "gender", label: sensitive }
    \- { text: "system_log", label: non_sensitive }
  dl_terms:
    \- { text: "religious affiliation", label: sensitive }
    \- { text: "genetic data", label: sensitive }
.fi
.RE
.
.P
See
.I docs/sensitivity_terms_sensitive_categories.example.yaml
and
.I docs/PLAN_SENSITIVE_CATEGORIES_ML_DL.md
for a full set of sensitive-category terms (health, religion, political, PEP, race, union, genetic, biometric, sex life).
.
.SH LEARNED PATTERNS (OUTPUT)
When
.B learned_patterns.enabled
is true, the application writes terms that were classified as sensitive during the scan to
.BR learned_patterns.output_file .
You can merge these into your
.B ml_patterns_file
for the next run to improve detection.
.
.P
Config example:
.RS
.nf
learned_patterns:
  enabled: true
  output_file: learned_patterns.yaml
  min_sensitivity: HIGH
  min_confidence: 70
  min_term_length: 3
  require_pattern: true
  append: true
  exclude_if_in_ml_patterns: true
.fi
.RE
.
.P
The output file has the same list format as ML/DL terms (text + label: sensitive).
Merge entries into
.B ml_patterns_file
manually or with a script; then the next run will use the expanded set.
.
.SH FILES (SUMMARY)
.TP
.I config.yaml
Main configuration (targets, file_scan, report, api, sqlite_path, scan, optional detection and file paths).
.TP
.I config/regex_overrides.yaml
Example path for custom regex patterns (name, pattern, norm_tag).
.TP
.I config/ml_patterns.yaml
Example path for ML training terms (text, label).
.TP
.I config/dl_patterns.yaml
Example path for DL training terms (same format; can point to the same file as ML).
.TP
.I learned_patterns.yaml
Example output path when learned_patterns.enabled is true.
.
.SH INSTALLATION OF THIS MAN PAGE
Section 5 pages are installed in
.IR man5 .
Install both section 1 and 5 from the source tree, then create symlinks so that
.B "man data_boar"
and
.B "man 5 data_boar"
work in addition to
.B lgpd_crawler .
See the
.B "INSTALLATION OF THIS MAN PAGE"
section in
.BR data_boar (1)
(or
.BR lgpd_crawler (1))
for the full sequence (copy
.I docs/data_boar.1
and
.I docs/data_boar.5
into
.I man1
and
.IR man5 ,
then optionally
.B "ln -sf data_boar.1 lgpd_crawler.1"
and
.B "ln -sf data_boar.5 lgpd_crawler.5"
in the respective directories for backward compatibility,
.BR mandb ).
.PP
After installation, view this page with:
.RS
.B man 5 data_boar
or
.B man 5 lgpd_crawler
.RE
.PP
To view the command and options (section 1) use
.B "man data_boar"
or
.B "man lgpd_crawler"
(or
.BR "man 1 data_boar" ,
.BR "man 1 lgpd_crawler" ).
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR data_boar (1),
.BR lgpd_crawler (1)
(command, options, API, curl examples),
.IR README.md ,
.IR docs/USAGE.md ,
.IR docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md
(failures, connectivity, credentials, Docker; see Scan failures sheet and suggested next steps),
.IR docs/SENSITIVITY_DETECTION.md ,
.IR docs/sensitivity_terms_sensitive_categories.example.yaml ,
.IR docs/regex_overrides.example.yaml ,
.IR docs/deploy/DEPLOY.md .
