.\" lgpd_crawler.1 - man page for Data Boar (python3-lgpd-crawler engine)
.\" View as: man data_boar, man lgpd_crawler, man 1 data_boar, man 1 lgpd_crawler
.TH DATA_BOAR 1 "March 2026" "Data Boar 1.5.3" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
data_boar, lgpd_crawler \- audit databases and filesystems for personal and sensitive data (Data Boar)
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B data_boar
[
.B \-\-config
.I FILE
]
[
.B \-\-web
]
[
.B \-\-port
.I PORT
]
[
.B \-\-reset\-data
]
[
.B \-\-tenant
.I NAME
]
[
.B \-\-technician
.I NAME
]
.
.P
.B lgpd_crawler
is accepted as an alias; both names refer to the same application.
.P
The actual entry point is:
.br
.RS 4
.B python main.py
[
.I OPTIONS
]
.RE
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Data Boar
is a data discovery tool that helps organizations comply with LGPD, GDPR, CCPA, HIPAA and related regulations by scanning configured data sources for personal and sensitive data.
.
.P
It discovers and maps potential PII and sensitive data using configurable
.I regex
patterns and an
.I ML
classifier (TF-IDF + RandomForest), with optional
.I DL
(sentence embeddings) for improved detection.
Out-of-the-box it recognises common PII (CPF, email, phone, SSN, etc.) and sensitive categories (health, religion, political affiliation, gender, biometric, genetic, race, union, PEP, sex life).
No raw sample content is stored; only metadata is written to a local SQLite database.
The application produces Excel reports with multiple sheets (findings, recommendations, trends, report info) and a sensitivity/risk heatmap PNG.
.
.P
Supported targets include: SQL databases (PostgreSQL, MySQL, MariaDB, SQLite, SQL Server, Oracle), local or mounted filesystems, optional Power BI workspaces, Power Apps (Dataverse), remote shares (SharePoint, WebDAV, SMB, NFS), and REST APIs.
Optional features include: possible minor data detection (LGPD Art. 14, GDPR Art. 8), aggregated/cross-referenced identification risk (quasi-identifiers per table/file), and optional API key protection for the web API.
.
.P
The application can be run as a one-shot CLI tool or as a long-running web API with a dashboard.
Each scan is stored as a session with optional
.I tenant/customer
and
.I technician/operator
tags for attribution.
.
.SH SECURITY
The web API sends security headers on all responses: X-Content-Type-Options, X-Frame-Options,
Content-Security-Policy (CSP), Referrer-Policy, Permissions-Policy, and HSTS when the request is HTTPS.
CSP can be tightened via environment/config or at the reverse proxy.
.P
Database and MongoDB connection URLs encode user and password (e.g. special characters like @, :, /, # are percent-encoded) so credentials do not break URL parsing; no extra configuration is required.
When
.I api.require_api_key
is true, GET /config returns 401 without a valid API key, protecting the config file (which may contain credentials) from unauthenticated access.
.P
Technicians: protect the Configuration page when the API is exposed to untrusted networks by enabling
.I api.require_api_key
and using a strong key; run behind a reverse proxy with TLS for production.
See
.I SECURITY.md
and
.I docs/security.md
(EN), and
.I docs/deploy/DEPLOY.md
(Security and hardening) for details.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "\-\-config " FILE
Path to the configuration file (YAML or JSON).
Defaults to
.IR config.yaml .
Used both for one\-shot audits and to resolve API options when starting the web server.
.
.TP
.B \-\-web
Start the REST API server instead of running a one\-shot audit.
When this flag is set the process does not run a scan automatically; scans are triggered via the dashboard or HTTP (e.g.\&
.BR curl (1)).
.
.TP
.BI "\-\-port " PORT
Port for the API when
.B \-\-web
is set.
Defaults to
.IR 8088 .
Ignored in one\-shot mode.
Can be overridden by
.B api.port
in the configuration file.
.
.TP
.B \-\-reset\-data
Dangerous maintenance operation: wipes all scan sessions, findings and failures from the SQLite database, deletes generated Excel reports and heatmap PNGs under
.I report.output_dir
and records a row in the
.I data_wipe_log
table.
No scan is started; the process exits after the reset.
See SECURITY.md before use in production.
.
.TP
.BI "\-\-tenant " NAME
Optional tenant or customer name for the scan in CLI (one\-shot) mode.
Stored as
.I tenant_name
on the session and written to the "Report info" sheet and dashboard.
.
.TP
.BI "\-\-technician " NAME
Optional technician or operator name for the scan in CLI (one\-shot) mode.
Stored as
.I technician_name
on the session and written to the "Report info" sheet and dashboard.
.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The main config file (YAML or JSON) defines:
.IP \(bu 2
.B targets
\- list of databases, filesystems, APIs, shares (name, type, connection or path).
.IP \(bu 2
.B file_scan
\- extensions, recursive, scan_sqlite_as_db, sample_limit.
.IP \(bu 2
.B report
\- output_dir; optionally
.B recommendation_overrides
(list of norm_tag_pattern with base_legal, risk, recommendation, priority, relevant_for) for custom recommendation text per category (e.g.\& health, religion, political).
.IP \(bu 2
.B api
\- port; optionally require_api_key, api_key or api_key_from_env for API key protection (GET /health remains public).
.IP \(bu 2
.B sqlite_path
\- path to the SQLite database (default:
.IR audit_results.db ).
.IP \(bu 2
.B scan
\- max_workers for parallelism.
.IP \(bu 2
Optional:
.B rate_limit
\- global safety limits to avoid accidental overload: enabled, max_concurrent_scans, min_interval_seconds, grace_for_running_status. When enabled, API/dashboard scan-start endpoints may return HTTP 429 with a JSON body containing
.I error
and
.I reason
fields (the CLI only logs warnings and exit codes remain unchanged). See
.I docs/USAGE.md
and
.I data_boar (5)
(or
.I lgpd_crawler (5))
for full configuration examples.
.IP \(bu 2
Optional:
.B detection
(minor_age_threshold, minor_cross_reference, aggregated_identification_enabled, quasi_identifier_mapping),
.B ml_patterns_file
,
.B dl_patterns_file
,
.B regex_overrides_file
,
.B sensitivity_detection.ml_terms
/
.B .dl_terms
,
.B learned_patterns
.
.P
See
.I docs/USAGE.md
and
.I docs/SENSITIVITY_DETECTION.md
for the full schema and examples.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CONFIG_PATH
Path to the configuration file used by the web API.
When the server is started with
.B \-\-web
and no
.B \-\-config
path is given, the application loads configuration from
.B CONFIG_PATH
if set, or from
.IR config.yaml
in the current working directory.
.
.TP
.B AUDIT_API_KEY
When
.B api.api_key_from_env
is set in config and
.B api.require_api_key
is true, the API key is read from this variable (alternative to
.B api.api_key
in the config file).
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I config.yaml
Default configuration file (targets, file_scan, report, api, sqlite_path, scan, optional detection and pattern files).
.
.TP
.I audit_results.db
SQLite database for sessions, findings and failures (path set by
.BR sqlite_path ).
.
.TP
.I Relatorio_Auditoria_*.xlsx
Excel reports per session, under
.B report.output_dir
(with sheets: Report info, Database findings, Filesystem findings, Scan failures, Recommendations, Trends, etc.).
.
.TP
.I heatmap_*.png
Sensitivity/risk heatmap images per session, in the same directory as the Excel reports.
.
.SH WEB INTERFACE
When the API is running (\fB\-\-web\fR), open in a browser:
.
.TP
.B /
Dashboard: scan status, "Start scan" button, tenant/technician inputs, recent sessions and download links, progress chart.
.TP
.B /reports
List of all sessions with Download link per session (regenerates Excel report).
.TP
.B /config
Edit configuration (YAML) in the browser; "Save configuration" writes to the config file used for the next scan.
.TP
.B /help
Quickstart, config examples, sensitivity detection and recommendation_overrides, links to README and USAGE (EN/pt\-BR).
.TP
.B /about
Application name, version, author, license.
.TP
.B /docs
Interactive API documentation (OpenAPI/Swagger).
.P
The "Start scan" button triggers
.B POST /scan
(a full audit of all targets in the current config).
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS One\-shot CLI
.TP
Minimal scan with default config:
.RS
.B python main.py \-\-config config.yaml
.RE
.
.TP
Scan with tenant and technician metadata:
.RS
.B python main.py \-\-config config.yaml \-\-tenant "Acme Corp" \-\-technician "Alice Silva"
.RE
.
.TP
Wipe all sessions, findings and generated reports (dangerous):
.RS
.B python main.py \-\-config config.yaml \-\-reset\-data
.RE
.
.SS Web API
.TP
Start the API on port 8088:
.RS
.B python main.py \-\-config config.yaml \-\-web \-\-port 8088
.RE
.
.TP
Use CONFIG_PATH and start the server:
.RS
.nf
export CONFIG_PATH=/etc/lgpd\-audit/config.yaml
python main.py \-\-web \-\-port 8088
.fi
.RE
.
.SS curl \- API examples
.TP
Start a full audit:
.RS
.nf
curl \-X POST http://localhost:8088/scan
.fi
.RE
.
.TP
Start a scan with tenant and technician:
.RS
.nf
curl \-X POST http://localhost:8088/scan \\
  \-H "Content\-Type: application/json" \\
  \-d '{"tenant": "Acme Corp", "technician": "Alice Silva"}'
.fi
.RE
.
.TP
Check scan status:
.RS
.nf
curl http://localhost:8088/status
.fi
.RE
.
.TP
Health check (liveness/readiness; always public even when API key is required):
.RS
.nf
curl http://localhost:8088/health
.fi
.RE
.
.TP
List sessions:
.RS
.nf
curl http://localhost:8088/list
.fi
.RE
.
.TP
Download latest Excel report:
.RS
.nf
curl \-o report.xlsx http://localhost:8088/report
.fi
.RE
.
.TP
Download latest heatmap PNG:
.RS
.nf
curl \-o heatmap.png http://localhost:8088/heatmap
.fi
.RE
.
.TP
Download latest audit log:
.RS
.nf
curl \-o audit.log http://localhost:8088/logs
.fi
.RE
.
.TP
Download report and heatmap for a specific session:
.RS
.nf
curl \-o report.xlsx "http://localhost:8088/reports/SESSION_ID"
curl \-o heatmap.png "http://localhost:8088/heatmap/SESSION_ID"
.fi
.RE
.
.TP
Download audit log for a session:
.RS
.nf
curl \-o audit.log "http://localhost:8088/logs/SESSION_ID"
.fi
.RE
.
.TP
Update tenant/customer for a session (PATCH):
.RS
.nf
curl \-X PATCH "http://localhost:8088/sessions/SESSION_ID" \\
  \-H "Content\-Type: application/json" \\
  \-d '{"tenant": "New Tenant Name"}'
.fi
.RE
.
.TP
When API key is required (X-API-Key or Bearer):
.RS
.nf
curl \-X POST http://localhost:8088/scan \\
  \-H "X-API-Key: your-secret-key"
# or
curl \-X POST http://localhost:8088/scan \\
  \-H "Authorization: Bearer your-secret-key"
.fi
.RE
.
.SH INSTALLATION OF THIS MAN PAGE
To install this man page system\-wide on a typical Linux or BSD system, ensure the target directories exist, copy both section 1 and 5 pages, create symlinks so that both
.B data_boar
and
.B lgpd_crawler
work, then update the man index:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sudo mkdir \-p /usr/local/share/man/man1/ /usr/local/share/man/man5/
sudo chmod 755 /usr/local/share/man/man1/ /usr/local/share/man/man5/
sudo cp docs/lgpd_crawler.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
sudo cp docs/lgpd_crawler.5 /usr/local/share/man/man5/
sudo chmod 644 /usr/local/share/man/man1/lgpd_crawler.1 /usr/local/share/man/man5/lgpd_crawler.5
sudo ln \-sf lgpd_crawler.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/data_boar.1
sudo ln \-sf lgpd_crawler.5 /usr/local/share/man/man5/data_boar.5
sudo mandb
.fi
.RE
.PP
The symlinks make
.B "man data_boar"
and
.B "man 5 data_boar"
show the same pages as
.B "man lgpd_crawler"
and
.B "man 5 lgpd_crawler"
(backward compatibility).
.PP
The
.B chmod 755
on the directories ensures all users can traverse them (new directories may be 750 with a restrictive umask). The
.B chmod 644
on the files ensures all users can read the pages (the copies might otherwise be 640).
.PP
On some BSD systems use
.B "sudo makewhatis"
instead of
.BR mandb .
If a directory does not exist,
.B "sudo mkdir -p"
creates it so that
.B "sudo cp"
does not fail with "No such file or directory".
.PP
After installation, view the page with:
.RS
.B man data_boar
or
.B man lgpd_crawler
(section 1), and
.B "man 5 data_boar"
or
.B "man 5 lgpd_crawler"
(section 5).
.RE
.
.SH TWO MAN PAGES (SECTION 1 AND 5)
This manual is in section
.B 1
(commands).
A second manual in section
.B 5
describes
.I configuration and file formats
(config file topology, regex/ML/DL pattern files, examples).
View it with
.BR "man 5 data_boar"
or
.BR "man 5 lgpd_crawler" .
On Unix/Linux/BSD, section 1 is for programs and commands; section 5 is for file formats and conventions.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR data_boar (5),
.BR lgpd_crawler (5)
(configuration and pattern file formats),
.BR python (1),
.BR curl (1).
.P
Project documentation in the source tree:
.IR README.md ,
.IR docs/USAGE.md ,
.IR docs/USAGE.pt_BR.md ,
.IR docs/TROUBLESHOOTING.md
(connectivity, credentials, Docker; failures and suggested next steps),
.IR docs/SENSITIVITY_DETECTION.md ,
.IR docs/PLAN_SENSITIVE_CATEGORIES_ML_DL.md ,
.IR docs/deploy/DEPLOY.md
(Docker and image on Docker Hub:
.IR fabioleitao/data_boar ).
